In video number 24, "Caring for Elderly Parents
and the Feelings of a Child," I would like to
greet you all and welcome to the
radio program "Heartfelt Conversations with Ms. Pham Thi
Yen," broadcast number 24.
Throughout their lives, parents have made
endless sacrifices for their children,
from the hardships of pregnancy and childbirth
to the toil and sacrifices of raising their children.
All their efforts and dedication are poured
into their children. By the time their
children grow up, their parents' bodies have already aged, their figures have become
burdened with the weight of time.
Therefore, as children, our duty is to repay
that debt of gratitude. I
wholeheartedly care for them both materially and
spiritually; only then can I partially
repay the profound kindness of my parents.
Coming to the radio program "Heartfelt Conversations"
today, I would like to share with you the
heartfelt thoughts of a child addressed to Ms. Pham Thi
Yen, to express my feelings about
caring for and supporting my elderly mother. A question from a
reader (who wishes to remain anonymous): "Hello, Ms. Pham Thi Yen,
my mother is now..."  At 60 years old, she's still healthy and
normal, but she doesn't do anything. She eats
alone, but because she doesn't work, she does
n't have enough to eat. She's a
woman who married far away. I've advised Bảo
many times that if she can't do
heavy work, she should do light work to earn extra income
to support herself, but she
refuses. All day she just likes to
gossip and talk about
other people's affairs. Many times
people have come to our house to insult her, forcing us to beg them to stop. That's why we don't give her money; we want her to work hard and stop gossiping about other people's affairs. Even if we
give her money, she spends it very wastefully,
and when it runs out, she borrows from everywhere. We
tell her that when she gets sick and
can't work anymore, we'll be
responsible. Now she's healthy and
doesn't work, relying on us for
money, which only makes her more dependent
and gives her more time to gossip. We
just hope that
even though she doesn't work, she'll stay home and take
care of the house and the grandchildren for us.  Rest
assured, when they go to work, my brothers won't begrudge
me anything. It's not that they don't care about us,
but because she doesn't listen to them,
they're fed up and let her do
whatever she wants. As a daughter, I love my
mother, but I don't agree with what
she does. I often go to the temple, but I
don't understand anything. I even brought her back to
my house to take refuge and listen to the master's teachings,
but she doesn't sit and listen;
she just sleeps and doesn't want to listen. I've
advised her many times, but she won't
change. So, I ask you, teacher, to guide my
brothers and me on what we should do to be dutiful
children. I am grateful for your kindness.
Dear friends, there's an old saying, "The earth gives birth to grass,"
and the spirit of parents in old age sometimes
gives rise to bad actions that go
against the wishes and desires of their children. Just like
in the story of the
person who sent this message to the
program, my mother is still healthy but
lazy and often spreads gossip,
affecting the family.
Therefore, sometimes children can't
avoid getting angry and having negative thoughts
about their mother. In
this situation...  Ms. Pham Thi Yen will give advice to help the
child and their
family members understand how to behave appropriately towards
their mother. I will read
to you Ms. Pham Thi Yen's response
to the child. Ms. Pham
Thi Yen replied: "Hello, dear. The Buddha taught that
there are eight sufferings, the first of which is the
most constant: the suffering of not getting what one desires.
That is, when things
don't go as we wish, we suffer. A Buddhist disciple needs to use enlightenment to transform suffering. When we think about our mother's actions that cause us
distress,
we should consider who takes
care of us since we were born. If the mother didn't take care of the
children and only the father did, then we
can say the mother is lazy. If the mother took care of us from birth and only became
lazy when the children grew up, then
we need to consider her health and
perspective. Perhaps she has back pain."  Or perhaps there's some illness
that makes Mom tired from working,
or maybe Mom thinks that because she worked
hard raising them before, now that she's old, she
needs to rest. She doesn't care,
they have to take care of her.
So this needs to be clearly re-evaluated
before we can draw an objective and wise conclusion.
If Mom falls into these scenarios,
we can understand and accept that
Mom's house is
dirty and we can diligently clean it for her
whenever we come home. If Mom
has been irresponsible, lazy, selfish, and
neglectful of her children since giving birth, we should reflect
on our own karma.
If we were unfilial in a previous life, we don't receive Mom's care and attention in this life. By becoming enlightened,
we won't be troubled and can adapt
to the circumstances and help
Mom gradually reduce her selfishness
by telling her stories about our children,
directing her attention to them, and
reducing her selfishness.
For example, tell her stories about your child, like "I got
10 points," or tell her about
your child showing off to Grandma Vân.  The next time I
called, my mother asked how my son was doing in school,
how he was doing lately.
This concern, this act of caring, helped my mother
reduce her selfishness. It's also a way to
gradually guide my parents towards virtuous conduct. Regarding my mother's tendency to stir up trouble and
gossip, which often requires
intervention from neighbors, I
shouldn't interfere because I need to let her see the
harm of gossip so she can learn
from her mistakes. I need to
awaken to the fact that in my past life I saw that
gossip was untrue. I could have spoken
up to defend the truth, but I ignored it, and
now I suffer the
trouble of gossip, as it's related to my parents. As for
the part where I caused trouble and gossip that harmed me and brought me shame, I've awakened to this realization, so instead of being
troubled, I should actively perform good deeds
and dedicate the merits to my mother. I could also hold a spiritual gathering
to dedicate the merits to the
karmic creditors of my mother and
family, regarding her wasteful
spending and borrowing money, which my
siblings now have to repay.  We
should also carefully consider whether Mom is truly overspending. There are
many expenses related to dealing with relatives in the countryside, and if we don't examine it carefully, we
won't have a realistic view of the
situation. If we see Mom spending wisely and we have
n't given her enough to
meet her relatives and neighbors, we should
adjust the amount so she doesn't have to
borrow. If, upon closer examination, we see Mom is
overspending, we should allow her a longer repayment period. This
will deter lenders from lending her
money. This is also a way to help Mom develop self-control
and reduce wasteful spending, leading to positive karma. The
worry about
Mom's poor eating habits and lack of food could arise from
two situations: 1) Mom is overspending and doesn't have enough to
eat, in which case
we should give her more; 2) Mom is
overspending and doesn't have enough to eat. In this case, we should make an
agreement with the vendors that Mom
refuses to buy food and tell them to deliver the
goods as agreed, and we will
pay for it. Or, depending on
circumstances, we can call and instruct the delivery person to bring the goods to
Mom.  In my opinion, every family has
different circumstances, and I sympathize with
siblings because if this matter is
n't thoroughly understood, we can
easily be attacked by our
spouse regarding our parents' issues.
Sometimes, this pressure is caused by the spouse themselves
when they perceive
our parents in a different, bloodthirsty way. This
is the issue that needs attention. So, if
we have the right words, we will be able to understand the
issue and resolve it for
our spouse
regarding our parents, and reduce
this pressure ourselves. This is also necessary to
reduce our troubles and find
peace in life. The Buddha's teachings are truly noble,
helping us to attain enlightenment and reduce
suffering for ourselves and those around us who have a
connection with us. Let's believe in thinking about
everything in life using the doctrine of karma.
Through
Ms. Pham Thi Yen's analysis, we can
realize that in every matter, we need to
have thorough thinking from many
perspectives. Otherwise, we will suffer
and create negative consequences.  Dissatisfaction in life,
especially towards our parents, is something we must be mindful of.
We must learn to empathize, love,
and always remember the kindness and sacrifices our
parents have made for us, so that we can repay them and fulfill our
filial duty. Only then,
after our parents pass away, will we not feel
sorrow when we recall the years they
were alive and realize we did not treat them
fully, thus avoiding the regret and remorse of being
unfilial that will haunt us for the rest of our
lives. This is the end of the 24th episode of the radio program "Confessions" by
Pham Thi Yen.
If you have any difficulties
or dead ends in life and want to find
someone to share them with, you can send your
questions to Ms. Pham Thi Yen by
sharing them on the Facebook group "Confessions with
Ms. Pham Thi Yen and Tam Chieu Hoan Quan" or by messaging directly to the fanpage "Pham Thi Yen Tam Chieu Hoan Quan". The 25th episode of the radio program "Confessions with Ms.
Pham Thi Yen" will return at
10 PM next Saturday.
Thank you for your
attention. Goodbye and see you again!  Uh uh